Resonant silicon sensors with electrothermal excitation and strain gauges in metal thin-film technology
 

Final presentation “The use of micromechanics for the fabrication of frequency-analog sensors” 

Dr. Herbert Bartuch, GMS – Gesellschaft für Mikrotechnik und Sensorik mbH, Industriestraße 7, St. Georgen

 

Summary

Silicon bars (thickness: about 50 μm, width: 1 mm) of different lengths (3 – 10 mm) were fabricated by 
anisotropic etching techniques in thermally oxidized (100)-Si wafers and provided with NiCr microheaters
placed at the bar ends. Furthermore, four measuring resistors connected to form a full bridge are located
on the beam. As a result of pulse-like heating, the beam is excited to vibrate. The periodic stretching or
compression of the measuring resistors leads to a frequency-analog bridge signal which is very well suited 
for detecting changes in the resonant behavior. The possibilities of this sensor principle for the detection 
of force, temperature and gas flows are illustrated by means of measurements. In the realization of 
frequency-analog sensors, a cost advantage results from the fact that the measurement signal is 
quasi-digital, so that A/D conversion is not required.

The electrical layout, including the bondable and/or solderable external connections, was implemented throughout 
using metal thin-film technology. The layer systems NiCr / TiPdAu (solder variant) and NiCr / TiPdAu / galv. Au 
(bond variant) were deposited using PVD processes and subjected to the usual photolithographic and wet chemical
process steps for patterning. Through the process engineering work, an optimal combination of the silicon 
etching technology with the fabrication of the electrical components of the sensors was achieved, which will 
ultimately lead to high yield and low manufacturing costs. The high thermal stability of the metal layer
system (up to 225 ºC for non-electrode contacts) raises the possibility of high-temperature applications 
for such sensors.

Extensive static and dynamic FEA calculations, supported by experimental results for external excitation 
and electrothermal excitation, showed that the resonance behavior of the sensors is not significantly 
affected by the directly applied strain gauge bridge. Further numerical calculations (including CFD flow 
simulation) also formed the starting point for initial optimization of the sensor sensitivity and were 
used to interpret the experimental results.

 
Testimonial

“Among other assignments, Dr. Fabula was responsible for optimizing the design of pressure transducers 
with metal film strain gauges by means of FE calculations. The results achieved stood the industrial 
test and contributed to the stabilization and further development of this production line in the GMS Company.

Dr. Fabula also demonstrated his technical competence, combined with circumspect work organization and his 
high level of commitment in other projects. His work on the modeling and application-specific optimization 
of micromechanical force and flow sensors using the FE method had a decisive influence on the design and 
layout of prototypes of a micromechanical force sensor with electrothermal excitation, which were 
then subsequently manufactured at GMS.

On the initiative of Dr. Fabula, GMS decided to continue the work in a joint project towards a commercially 
viable product. The results are reflected in the customer-specific development currently underway at our company.

Dr. Fabula always proved to be very open to the specific development tasks of our company. We would like 
to thank him for his services so far and look forward to further good cooperation.” ~ Dipl.-Ing. Hans Weiss, 
Owner & Managing Director, GMS – Gesellschaft für Mikrotechnik und Sensorik mbH

 

Knowledge transfer services

Application of thin-film strain gauge on metal carrier with insulating interlayer, with the following features:
- max. process temperature 320ºC
- excellent long-term and creep properties
- integrable temperature compensation
- electrical dielectric strength > 500 VAC
- Layout development and isotropic / anisotropic etching of simple micromechanical elements in
  silicon (bridge, tongues, bars, membranes)
- Application of electrical thin film arrays on micromechanical elements for signal acquisition
  (microheaters, strain gauges, temperature sensors) and assembly and interconnection technology 
  (solderable and bondable contact system) for e.g. frequency-analog sensors, pressure sensors, 
  fast temperature sensors etc.
 
